Blog post: Design System and Crazyness (#5)
guillaumewuip/guillaumewuip.github.io: _posts/2021-01-29-design-system-schizophrenia.md

---
title: Design System and Schizophrenia 

draft: false

page : false

---

Last week my ex-colleague and friend [Benoit Rajalu](https://www.benrajalu.net/)
shared a post called "Is it really a design system?" in which he lists the
different reasons why your shiny project you call a "Design System" is maybe not

> a real one but just a collection of bad components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a real one but just a collection of **bad** components.
```
Haha pas forcément, la code quality peut être excellente :D

Author: c'est histoire de faire une intro qui accroche tout le monde

When your designers and developers don't use the same language and components,
when you have no documentation except a Storybook or few comments on a Figma
file, when people work in silos instead of capilalizing on what the
DS give them, when designers reinvent the wheel for each Figma file and
developers code single-use ultra-specific components, when there is all that but

> you do nothing to fix it then, he says, you're *not* building a Design System.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When designers and developers are not using the same language and components,
when you have no documentation except a Storybook or few comments on a Figma
file, when people work in silos instead of capitalizing on what the
DS give them, when designers reinvent the wheel in each Figma file and
developers code single-use ultra-specific components, when there is all that both nothing is attempted to 
fix it then, he says, you're *not* building a Design System.
```

> And I strongly agreee with him.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And I strongly agree with him.
```

He ends his article with this powerful schema who have help me grow a strong

> opinion on the situation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The article ends on this powerful schema which has helped me formulate a strong
opinion on the situation.
```

![A diagram showing on one side an opposition between code and design, and on the other a cycle between features and a Design System](/assets/img/design-system-schizophrenia-diagram.png)

Yeah. Unfortunately installing a DS means *change*. We don't like change. It
means switching from the traditional "designers vs developers" mindset (left) to

> a Product mindset (right). We don't like switching mindset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It sure is pretty. Unfortunately setting-up a DS means *change*. We don't like change. It
means switching from the traditional "designers vs developers" mindset (left) to
a Product mindset (right). We don't like switching mindsets. Switching mindsets requires a mindset in and of itself.
```

To install a  Design System what you want to target is having a *team* that
owns a *product* (the DS and its artifacts) that have *customers* (your others

> teams).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To integrate a Design System within your organisation,  your target is to have a *team* that
owns a *product* (the DS and its artifacts), a product that has *customers* (your others
teams).
```

> But, I'm forced to admit that I don't see a lot of Design System *teams* in

Author: ```suggestion
But, I'm forced to admit that we don't see a lot of Design System *teams* in
```

> companies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I have to admit that I am not seeing a lot of Design System *teams* in
companies so far.
```

There are Design System *projects*, for sure. It's very trendy those days. They
are mainly driven by the base of the organization, ie. some designers and/or
developers. They work on it on the week-end. They come early in the morning
or they leave late at night to have some time to code for the Design System

> besides their "real" job, shipping features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are Design System *projects*, for sure. It's very trendy these days. They
are mainly driven by the base of the organization, ie. some designers and/or
developers. They work on it on weekends. They come early in the morning
or they leave late at night to code for the Design System
without slowing done production for their "real" job, shipping features.
```

Sometimes, when those Design System projects begin to see some traction
(because, yeah, it's a powerful concept) and when the initial volunteers haven't
burned out yet, leadership enter the game and declare "We have a Design
System! It's so good! Thanks so and so.".
They write a blog post showing the world how their Design System revolutionized

> their company while in fact nothing happen inside.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, when a Design System project begins to see some traction
(as it will because, turns out, it's a powerful concept) and when the initial volunteers haven't
burned out yet, the organization's leadership enters the game and declares "We have a Design
System! It's so good! Thanks so and so".
They write a blog post showing the world how *their* Design System revolutionized
their company. Meanwhile, nothing has actually changed inside.
```

Nothing happen inside because they haven't embraced that a Design System is a

> product that need a dedicated team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nothing has changed because the company has not embraced that a Design System is a
product, and nurturing a product requires a dedicated team.
```

It's far from impossible to form such a team.
We already have infrastructure/platform teams that give others a solid platform
to run their services. We have security teams that give others tools to build
secure services. We have engineering productivity teams that help others with
day to day tools (CI, testing environment, etc.). We have analysts and UX

> researchers to support others at making decisions based on data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why? Is such a thing a pipe dream? It should not be, we are already used to this paradigm in our engineering departments.
We have infrastructure or platform teams that cater to the other units, providing a solid platform
to run their services. We already have security teams, in charge of the tools securing the other teams' services. 
We have engineering productivity teams that help others with
day to day tools (CI, testing environment, etc.). We have analysts and UX
researchers to support the decision-making of other teams with bespoke data. They are all "in-house" services teams.
```

We have all those teams but you can't form one for the Design System? What's

> your problem?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Organizations willingly invest in all  of those but can't form one for the Design System? What's
the problem?
```

Is it that you have to group designers and developers together and that's new
for you?
Don't you already do that for feature teams, squads, swarms or whatever name you

> give to your multidiciplinary teams? Those that work on features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is it the idea of mixing designers and developers together as one unit?
How is it different from what we do for feature teams, squads, swarms or whatever name you
give to multidisciplinary teams? Those that work on features.
```

> Is it that you don't want to start a war by having to decide whether this team
> reports to the VP Product or the VP Engineering? Does it really matter?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is it a reporting issue, were it's unclear whether such a team
reports to the VP of Product or to the VP of Engineering? Why would that actually matter? Aren't they both after the same ultimate goal of shipping the necessary features?
```

> Is it because your designers or developers are already understaffed? Don't you
> see how such a organization could be exactly what you need to accomodate with
> that?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is it because designers or developers are already understaffed? Well shoot, that's precisely why such a team ultimately building a Design System would help: it's there to help you do more with less.
```

> Is it because you don't have a PO/PM to lead this team? Don't you think you can
> just start with those ones that have managed to build the current Design System
> while doing their day to day job *at the same time*?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is it because there isn't a PO or PM to lead this team? What about those who have managed to build the current Design System while doing their day to day job *at the same time*? Aren't they leadership enough?
```

> By wanting your company to produce a Design System but not updating your
> organization to support it, you're making your designers and developers go
> crazy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a point to all that questioning: by wanting to produce a Design System without updating your
organization to support it, you're making your designers and developers go crazy.
```

> They have to fight every day with their management for this fondamental product
> because it's *never* the priority and there is *never* enough room on the
> roadmap for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have to fight every day with their management for this fondamental product
because it's *never* the priority and there is *never* enough room on the
roadmap for it. But they see its benefits, so they keep trying, and trying, and trying.
```

They have to go 100% for the Design System while staying 100% on their features,

> knowing such a pace always end bad - yes, burnout.

Author: ```suggestion
knowing such a pace always end badly - yes, burnout.
```

> They have to go 100% for the Design System while staying 100% on their features,
> knowing such a pace always end bad - yes, burnout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They end up giving 100% for the Design System while staying 100% on their regularly-scheduled features,
knowing such a pace always ends poorly - yes, burnout. Or wry cynicism in the best of cases.
```

> They have to handle colleagues that are against them. Those ones have no issue
> undermining the Design System. If it is so important a team would have been
> formed for the project, right?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It gets even muddier when you consider the relationships this "shadow Design System team" has with other colleagues. There will be animosity. Faced with such an unsanctioned, "bottom-up" project, some will have no issue undermining the Design System. If its methods and output were so important, a team would have been
formed around it, right? Right.
```

> They have to plan two very opposite mission in the same mind: doing their best

Author: ```suggestion
They have to plan two very opposite missions in the same mind: doing their best
```

> They have to plan two very opposite mission in the same mind: doing their best
> to ship a particular feature for their own team while creating a product that
> should accomodate every team needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Members of that shadow team are left planning two very opposite missions in the same mind. They must both do their best to ship a particular feature for their own specific team while simultaneously creating a product, one that  accommodates the needs of every team.
```

> They have to live in constant questioning because you don't give them the
> support and the leadership they need to work correctly in such a direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have to live in constant questioning,  not being afforded the
same support and leadership other "in-house services" teams have been given to work efficiently.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

They have to work without the proper communication structures. Nobody listen to them. Nobody consider their requests. Nobody respectes the rules the Design System comes with

```

> They have to manage all those contractions by themselves without the structures

Author: ```suggestion
They have to manage all those contractions by themselves without the support
```

others products have.

They're going crazy.

> By wanting your company to produce a Design System but not updating your
> organization to support it, all you do is installing schizophrenia.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By wanting your company to produce a Design System without
organizing around and for it, we chart a clear path to schizophrenia. At some point we must choose: what are the benefits of a Design System worth to us? As developers and designers, it's certainly not worth our health. As an organization it most definitely should not be either. 

Ultimately, nothing is free. Companies that have started building a Design System *will* soon see its advantages. If these benefits have come without change on your organization's part, then you can trust the cost has been paid by your employees. 
```
